Another character that appeared in these stories was Christian Prager.
He appeared in three of them.
Do you plan to use him in anything else in the future?
Well, I once thought of taking those three or the four stories.
I don't remember how many.
And using the basis of a novel.
But I began to feel that the Prager stories perhaps belong to the ecological 60s.
And that perhaps it was dated.
Although from what I've been hearing in recent years,
I've perhaps been in the ecological problem,
especially that they're not dated.
I like the character.
He was the character in my first story, the water sculptor.
And then he was a much younger version of himself in the sassans of air.
And then in Parks and Rest and Culture, he was a little older.
There's an interesting background there.
But it's essentially the background of something like The Sheep Look Up by John Brunner.
Many writers were writing that kind of ecological story in the 60s.
I don't know.
You're sufficiently interested that you would like to see a book incorporating those stories.
Sure, he was quite interesting.
He was.
Well, that's something that's never been said to me about him.
Speaking of that ecological 60s,
the stories that you just mentioned are quite bleak ecologically.
Does this mirror your personal fears?
Well, I tend to believe that things could be very good.
Human beings could do quite well with their science and technology.
And even though I'm a great believer in science and technology,
I still feel that we could very easily destroy ourselves.
It's not absolutely a foregone conclusion that we're going to do very well.
So I'm not bleak.
I'm just critical.
The water sculptor, which featured Christian Frager,
seemed to have some elements in it that anticipated macro life.
Was that conscious or unconscious?
The theme that I possibly inherited from Arthur Seekmark is that space travel will be the opening of space,
both for exploration and science as well as for industry,
will lead to a renaissance of world culture.
Now this happened quite clearly in the renaissance when Columbus and all the other great explorers opened up the new world.
That was the age of Shakespeare.
That was the age of many of the scientists.
It was a new opening of human possibility.
And I think that space travel will help create a different environment for the Earth.
I think much of the industry that will be space-based will help redeem the planet from what we've done to it.
And I think that new environment, that new world that will open up,
will deposit a different interior.
It will deposit a new world in the human heart, is what I'm trying to say.
This is something that is not understood by many people,
but any great environmental change deposits a new world in the human mind and in the human heart.
The possibility is certainly there that the future opening of space and the further growth of science and technology
might lead to a more humane society.
It's certainly a possibility, although it's not a foregone conclusion.
Okay, now we get to macro life, which has got to be your crowning achievement so far.
Is it...
Okay, you have ambitions to write the serious literary science fiction, which kind of escapes the old moles.
Are you satisfied that that's what it is? Did you accomplish that?
Well, I'll make the case for you to decide.
On the one hand, macro life is an attempt not to simply produce the illusion of thought
that you get in a piece of science fiction, but to actually bring in the thought,
not as a piece of bakery, very often thinking and reasoning,
which is very much a part of the human mind as much as feeling and action,
is simply brought in as a sublimated kind of material or gloss on the story.
I wanted to bring in the actual thought, the reasoning, the philosophizing into a piece of science fiction.
Now, this is a nod with the traditional novel, which moves by action, by feeling, by character, by metaphor, by image,
although there's a good deal of that in macro life also.
But it's sufficient new material or material that some people would find alien to fiction in the book
to make it seem strange to many readers.
I have nothing against writing the traditional novel, the slick kind of novel that many people like to read,
you know, the so-called good read.
I have nothing really against that, but I think in macro life I had to do it this way.
Perhaps in other books against the same background, I'll write the more accessible kind of novel,
even though I hope I'll be able to work in more of the thought and the philosophy in different ways.
You approach macro life in the way I just described, then you probably will have no trouble reading it,
but if you expect the traditional novel, the good read, you may find that you have to work at it a little bit.
The trouble is that science fiction is a field where it professes to be a literature of ideas and a literature of thinking,
but yet when a writer brings in the thinking and the ideas table back off, they don't really want the actual experience of thinking or reasoning.
But I believe that these things belong to human character as much as feeling and acting, so why shouldn't it be there?
I was quite surprised at how deep the prejudice runs against this kind of thing.
Some people are able to pick up macro life and read through it with fascination,
which surprises me given the kind of climate I'm describing,
and other people just can't seem to get beyond three or four pages.
One editor who was supposed to read it for a possible paper library print confessed that he couldn't get beyond three or four pages,
and this guy has a PhD in literature.
I was quite horrified to see this, but I'm afraid that many such people are educated well beyond their intelligence.
You can't hear my laughing because I have the button off, but that's good.
Let's talk a little bit about the background, the concept of macro life.
When did you get the idea and how long did you mull it over before you put it to paper?
Well, afterwards, the art cover gives the history of how I came upon it.
I think I read an article by G. Harry Stein, who was a real hard-fiance kind of buffed,
and he complained that all the really new ideas, this was around 1961,
he complained that all the new ideas were being ignored by science fiction
and that the best speculations were going on, places like General Electric and think tanks and whatever,
and the science fiction writers were 25 years behind at times.
I looked at one of the ideas he mentioned, which was a concept called macro life,
two words by Dan Rich Cole, and this was for something called the ultimate human society.
Cole made a lot of sense to me, and so I decided then that I was going to write a novel to be called Mancroll Life.
But over the years, I called I think in 1965, but over the years I developed the idea much further than he had taken it.
His macro worlds were on the order of the Queen Mary, 10,000 tons, 10,000 ton world, but very small,
probably closer to O'Neill's concept of space colonies.
My 600 kilometer egg shapes with dozens of levels and asteroid cores at the center are much more ambitious than I think Cole came up with it.
And my, also my primary interest was in the kind of social system that might develop within this material container,
because you could have almost any kind of social system you want developing within the economic supports
that are provided by this concept of macro life, the kind of self reproducing space, mobile space colony.
That is, that is in effect a form of life.
It modes, it reproduces, it thinks with its human social component, the possibility seem endless,
especially for something like the idea of revolt within the human generations.
Whenever people would get to the point of dissatisfaction with a particular system they have,
they would simply create another macro world container using the resources and help of the parent and create their own society within it.
It seems to me that this would give the kind of conservatism and stability that is demanded by human beings and social system,
as well as the openness and sense of creativity and adventure that seems to be racking from social systems that become too old and don't want to change.
It seems to be an answer to the problem of what is life for.
It's likely to continue.
If you want to say something more, sure, go ahead.
I think that pretty much covers it.
I would think that the novel gets very deeply into the variations on this basic approach.
It seems to me that there is nothing essentially impossible about developing this kind of mobile society.
It destroys a whole generation of science-fiction concepts which demand that we colonize the planets of other solar systems where I feel if it were possible to do that,
native life might be developing or one day develop and we would be pre-empting possible biological evolution there.
It pre-empts all that kind of science fiction and in fact says that that will never happen.
A whole science-fictional universe dies if you take macro-life seriously.
That brings up a point.
I wanted to talk to you primarily because I read macro-life and it is so terribly original because I've been brought up on the science fiction that you just mentioned.
It does seem to flush it.
Do you think that it has a shot that this idea that unless a culture leaves its dirt world, it's going to be static and not really expand as it could if it did get away and get into something like a macro world?
Well, if the resources of a planet are limited and it has no space-based industry with which to supplement the finitudes of a planetary surface,
then I think the culture will suffer primarily because of the finitude.
As I said, an open exploration-oriented, knowledge-oriented renaissance culture deposits a different kind of world in the human heart.
A limited culture deposits an ecological sixties kind of approach in the human heart.
I think there's a sense of constriction that would develop and take the idea of a zero-growth society.
I see that as essentially static both materially and culturally in the long run.
It would reach a kind of equilibrium with its environment, recycling everything.
That would be the end, I would think, of that kind of culture.
There's no reason why the sun output is tremendous, even if macro life were not to be mobile on the interstellar level.
We could certainly make better use of the sun space within our solar system for this end.
Before we leave the mechanics of writing macro, I want to ask you.
I know that the Cole article and the Stein article appeared in 1961.
Did you read these articles when they appeared? Have you been thinking about this that long or did you pick them up later?
I was thinking about macro life ever since I read the article.
I immediately saw what could be done.
I'm surprised that most science fiction writers still don't see it.
They still feel that we're going to colonize planets on a large scale.
I'm afraid that's a very old, imperialistic idea of colonizing.
I think there will be people who will attempt to do something with planets,
especially if we develop terraforming techniques for the transformation of Venus or the moon.
That sort of thing will go on.
But frankly, it's very difficult.
It all depends on how much energy you have to play around with.
But going to find solar-like planets in other star systems, taking them over,
that really strikes me as a kind of abortion of possible life to come.
So what we have here is a teenager saw a possibility in a magazine that mature science fiction readers,
writers for two decades, afterwards never hit on.
Yeah, by 1970 I had produced various drafts of Part 1.
When I began writing professionally, I realized that I would have to do this book sooner or later.
I decided I would do it and I was always amazed that someone else had not one taken the term
or written anything quite like this.
Now there are macro-life-like books within the field.
The book about cities in flight by James Blush is sort of like that.
But the cities don't reproduce.
They are old Earth cities that simply have taken to wandering around.
It's proto-macro-life of one kind or another.
The ideas have been around, but there's a kind of coherent sociocultural approach
that I think I've taken in that book, which will be the basis of at least six or seven other novels.
Each is very vastly different in technique and form from macro-life.
It has not been copied by anybody.
And I think that if they did copy it in a matter of six or seven months or even a year,
they could not possibly come up with everything that I thought of about it.
In the ten years that the actual writing took, most of the writing took,
happened between 1970 and 1979.
So it's very strange.
I've had such drastic reactions to the book, utter hatred or utter praise,
that I can only echo what I think was Oscar Wilde said,
that when the critics disagree, the artist should be at peace.
You had this idea for years. You wrote on it for ten years.
So you obviously were very enthusiastic about the idea.
In the writing, when I read it, I could tell at times that you could barely restrain your enthusiasm
for the idea that you had.
You didn't ever get preachy at all, but is it difficult to contain your enthusiasm sometimes
and maintain this dispassionate pose?
And we can see the emotions under there, but I think it'd be hard to control them sometimes.
Well, one of the difficulties I had is that Harper and Rowell
was not going to produce a book much over 150-pound words.
I could very easily have produced a book of a thousand printed pages,
and perhaps that might have been more interesting.
That might have been more ruled for character and personal development.
I think it was Arthur Seekh-Vark who, in addition to his enthusiasm for the book,
complimented me on striking a balance between the stapledonian distas
and the personal concerns of the characters.
He put his finger on it.
The problem with the book was to strike some kind of balance between the demands of thought
and the demands of art, or the demands of fiction and the demands of exposition.
But I think your reader can best understand this book
if they don't have a preset notion as to what constitutes fiction
and what constitutes science fiction and how much work they're willing to do in the reading of it.
I don't really think it's all that difficult a book to read.
The original material that you write in the near future,
is that going to be pretty much in this macro world universe?
Well, I have quite a number of books that I have planned.
Many of them vastly different from anything remotely connected with macro.
I think there'll be at least six books against the macro life background.
I think there's sufficient response from readers and sufficient appreciation from readers.
I've talked about 70 reviews of the book worldwide,
and I think maybe half a dozen of them were the nasty kind that I would get from magazines like Locust
or from people like John Clute, either of the great reviewers.
Put us up, put next to the positive reactions. These are lost completely.
To answer your question more specifically, I have many other novels planned.
I think I have about 20 novel projects that I've not developed to the point of submission.
Some of them will be very, very different.
I can't really go into them right now. I assume that they'll be different than what I've done today.
When you have all these ideas floating around in your head written on your notebook,
do you tend to get impatient and want to get them all down at once?
Is it hard to be patient and realize this is a lifelong process?
That's probably the worst part of it, is that I find up, I contracted for many, many books during my late 20s.
And now I am developing in my notebooks books that I think are growing out of much more mature impulses.
And yet I'm still burdened with the completion of contracts that demand that I be faithful to an earlier writer's vision.
Ursula Gwynne told me that I have to get past these books, so they must be done in one way or another.
But I'm nowhere near being able to write the kinds of books that I am planning, say, this year or that I planned last year.
There are half a dozen of them that are like that.
And I think they grow out of a stronger command of technique and of greater sense of human character.
Just a more mature writer is developing these books and I won't be able to get to them until the year after next, at the very least.
So I'm terribly impatient, sometimes I feel that I'll never get to them.
And there are a few books I want to write that have nothing to do with science fiction.
I think every writer of science fiction who is any good begins to feel that here is a certain kind of writing that has swallowed up the possibility of doing a more authentic kind of work that grows directly out of your own experience, that belongs to your own time and your own personal experience.
You read to find writers of the 20th century who do not write science fiction.
And if you're at all imaginative or discerning, you'll see the enormity of their achievement.
And if you want to play in that ballpark too, you may not have the ability, I think, to some degree science fiction to set you apart from that tradition.
But if you're a good writer, I think you will feel the call of that.
Primarily every writer should first think of themselves as a writer and then think of themselves as someone who happens to have written some science fiction, or some poetry, or short fiction, or historical fiction, or detective fiction, whatever.
You have to think of yourself as a writer first.
What's your definition of science fiction?
I think Isaac Asimov came up with about the best one I've ever seen.
And I've developed a, I've explained it a little more to myself.
It simply goes like this, that science fiction is about those aspects of future developments in science and technology, or perhaps in any field of human inquiry.
It's about the human impact of future developments.
The human impact makes it fiction, and the future developments makes it science fiction.
And I think if you stress each of those equally, human developments and future possibilities, then you have a science fiction that is continuous with the rest of literature.
It is not something that is antagonistic towards contemporary fiction, or towards any other kind of science fiction.
I'm afraid that too often genre fiction plays with ideas and has a very childish, naive attitude towards the humanity depicted in the stories.
Where do you see the genre heading in actuality, and where would you like to see it heading?
Well, I think it will pretty much stay the way it is.
According to that definition, you will always have literate science fiction, and you will always have the genre entertainment,
which develops a certain level of cleverness, and perhaps even a certain level of gripping vision.
But if you don't have the human impact, the exploration of the human heart, or the new worlds that are deposited in the human heart and in the human mind,
and if you don't have a certain degree of psychological sophistication, then you will not have literature.
Now, happily, there has always been a literate, high tradition of science fiction from H.T. Weldon, and there has always been the tradition of junkie science fiction.
I have no great fear of the so-called junkie science fiction, or the died-in-the-wool genre fiction, as long as it's well-crafted and shows a certain level of intelligence.
It does not have to fail in those respects.
Somebody like Keith Lommer, for example, shows enormous craftsmanship.
John Brunner, in some of his so-called lesser books, showed enormous craft and intelligence in the working out of genre materials.
There's really nothing wrong with doing that.
But it only gets objectionable when it dominates the field to the tune of 99%, and the serious or literate science fiction is just that squeezed out,
or when some sort of climate develops of absolute hatred for that kind of work.
Let's put it this way.
Any kind of literature is a record of how people regard themselves, and in the case of science fiction, how people regard the future.
150 years from now, the science fiction of today will be a record, a testimony of what we feared about the future, what we hoped for the future, and what we planned for the future.
And that's what makes literature that it bears some kind of testimony to the concerns of its time.
And this is a time that is very future-oriented, so we should have a literature that does that.
A literature which seeks to take all of these serious hopes and fears and to turn it into nothing more than Boy Scouts Among the Stars,
or some sort of pinball game is just betraying everything that I think is ultimately of interest to a reader.
It might be fun, it might be well done, but I think more things can be fun than that.
In the sense that we are in some way envisioning or perhaps contributing to our own futures is I think much more satisfying,
much more fun, much more pleasurable than simply masturbating with a series of conventions.
To conclude, just briefly, I think we'll always have the one kind of science fiction and the other,
just as we'll always have the junky contemporary fiction and the serious literature,
they'll be the ones that get the Nobel Prize and the others.
Happily we do have at least a half a dozen major figures who write science fiction.
Jane Wolf, Philip K. The Late Philip K. Dick, Ursula Gwyn, Spanish Rock Lam,
even Clark, who deserves to be taken seriously down the line.
Okay, one question that I came up with now that we're at the conclusion,
I wanted to ask you about this is back on MacroLife again.
You reported in the afterward to MacroLife that Paul O'Cillare's concept of archaeology inspired your name,
you're naming the first macro world astrome.
What's the background on that?
Well, the archaeology of the Solaria is simply a form of land bound macro life.
They are, as he puts it, one critic put it, they are containers for the human condition.
In other words, deep material supports for a kind of living.
And Dan Rich Cole, who also said that things like submarines or cities, for example,
a city is basically an initial form of macro life.
Since it concentrates human abilities and human aspirations and declares a kind of independence from the countryside.
I use this image in the book by saying that macro life is the ultimate independence of the city
from the countryside, natural planets being countryside, and macro worlds being cities,
except that now they're self-sufficient, whereas the cities on the surface of the earth still depend on the countryside
for their food and energy and whatever.
So Solaria's archaeologies are simply a better form of city, a more efficient humane form of city
that just doesn't grow any which way, but which is planned.
Contrary to the way people regard Solaria's archaeology, because of the vast beehives, they're not.
They are basically containers.
You could take almost any kind of building structures and put them on the shelves of the archaeology.
You could take cities, but you could take buildings that perhaps were common designs in the 19th century.
Two-story wooden frame houses and put them right onto the shelf of the archaeology.
They're open. They're not crowded.
They make use of gravitational drops, waste disposal.
They use land area efficiently so that the rest of the planet can go back to greenery.
Solaria says that's what they want.
People would not really be confined to these cities. They would be able to leave them.
I think they are a form of city that we have simply not tried yet.
In that sense, they're related to macro life and sense that cities are an issue of macro life.